---
title: Introduction
sidebar: mydoc_sidebar
permalink: 2_1.html
folder: mydoc
---

<style>
  div{text-align: justify;}
</style>

Data sources are an essential component for traffic forecasting to provide an understanding of current conditions, evaluate the impacts of different scenarios, and develop traffic estimates for future conditions. Different types of data can be used for a project, depending on the objectives, selected forecasting methodology, scope, and budget of the project. Common data types include traffic data, socio-economic factors, land use patterns, and transportation network characteristics. These data can be collected or compiled from a variety of different sources, such as traffic sensors installed in the field, household travel surveys, research institutions, US Census Bureau, and various state and local government agencies. With the advancement of technology, the proliferation of mobile devices, and the innovation of data analytics, new and novel types of data, or emerging "Big Data", are becoming available or accessible. These "Big Data" sources offer new insights into people’s travel behaviors and provide new travel related information that was not possible before.

The FDOT Transportation and Data Analytics (TDA) Office is the central clearinghouse and principal source for traffic, roadway, and multimodal freight and passenger data. The data and information cover a range of time periods: historic, current, and future. The TDA Office gathers data directly through automated means and indirectly through district field personnel or others. Third party vendors are sometimes used to provide supplemental data. TDA provides tools and training to record, process, analyze, and report data. The TDA Office also publishes informational documents and responds to special requests for data inside and outside the agency. Users are advised to check <a href="https://www.fdot.gov/statistics/default.shtm" target="_blank">TDA's website</a> most up-to-date information available.

Traffic data are among the most critical data and information pieces in the project traffic development process. The Traffic Monitoring Program within the TDA Office is designed to ensure that the collection and processing of needed traffic data is efficient, effective, and consistent. The Transportation Monitoring Program coordinates the collection of traffic data on all State Highway System (SHS) and many highways not on the SIS. Depending on location, traffic data may include volume, vehicle speed, vehicle classification, and vehicle weight data. Traffic data are collected from January through December of each year, and then converted into annual statistics during the first quarter of the following year. The annual traffic statistics are posted on <a href="https://tdaappsprod.dot.state.fl.us/fto/" target="_blank">Florida Traffic Online</a> Web Application by late spring/early summery of each year.
