---
title: Factors to be Considered in the Scoping Process
sidebar: mydoc_sidebar
permalink: 3_2.html
folder: mydoc
---

<style>
  div{text-align: justify;}
</style>

When scoping for project traffic forecasting, it is important to consider a wide range of factors to ensure that the project is properly focused, appropriately resourced, and to achieve its intended outcomes. There are several factors that should be considered.

<span style="color:#20a3d3"><b>3.2.1 Project Purpose and Need</b></span>

The purpose and need of a project are initially developed from transportation planning documents or processes such as Long Range Transportation Plan (LRTP) update, planning studies, and the Efficient Transportation Decision Making (ETDM) screening process. The purpose defines the transportation issues to be solved and outlines the goals of the project. The need arises from roadway deficiencies, issues, and/or concerns that currently exist or are expected to occur and serves as the foundation for developing and evaluating alternatives.

<span style="color:#20a3d3"><b>3.2.2 Project Limits</b></span>

The project limits refer to the geographic extent of the study area, which can be defined by the physical boundaries of the roadway elements (segments, intersections, or interchanges) or by other factors such as land use patterns or development areas. Defining the project limits helps focus the project on the most relevant areas and issues, establishes the data collection requirements, forecasting scope, and expected outcomes of the project.

<span style="color:#20a3d3"><b>3.2.3 Data Requirements</b></span>

The data that are needed to conduct the traffic forecasting should be identified, and a data collection plan should be developed considering all existing and expected multimodal modes of transportation within the project limits to support the project’s purpose and need. The data may include historical and existing traffic data, demographic information, land use data, and other relevant data on planned development and transportation projects.

<span style="color:#20a3d3"><b>3.2.4 Forecasting Methods</b></span>

The appropriate forecasting methods should be identified based on the project scope, availability of traffic forecasting models, data requirements, and stakeholder needs. This may involve forecasting with or without travel demand models, depending on the location and specific requirements of the project.

<span style="color:#20a3d3"><b>3.2.5 Project Plan</b></span>

A project plan should be developed to outline the specific tasks, timelines, and resources needed to complete the project on schedule and within budget. This may include data collection and analysis, model refinement, forecasting development, staffing requirements, stakeholder coordination, and review time.

<span style="color:#20a3d3"><b>3.2.6 Quality Control and Review Processes</b></span>

Processes for quality control and review of the traffic forecasting should be established, to ensure that the forecasting results are checked and certified for accuracy. This approach will help identify issues and their resolutions early in the process and consequently avoid delays.

By considering these factors, the project traffic forecasting can be effectively scoped and used to develop design requirements and evaluate the operational analyses measures of effectiveness to ensure that the scope is aligned with the goals and objectives of the project.




