---
title: Schedule Guidelines
sidebar: mydoc_sidebar
permalink: 3_5.html
folder: mydoc
---

<style>
  div{text-align: justify;}
</style>

Developing a traffic forecasting schedule will depend on the specific project and the complexity of the forecasting methods being used. However, below are some general schedule guidelines that can be considered:

+ <i>Define the scope and objectives of the project:</i> This should be done at the beginning of the project and should clearly define the goals and objectives of the traffic forecasting effort.
+ <i>Identify data needs and sources:</i> Determine the types of data that will be needed for the forecasting effort and identify potential sources of that data.
+ <i>Collect and process data:</i> Once the data sources have been identified and data collected, the data can be processed into a usable format.
+ <i>Select forecasting methods:</i> Choose the appropriate forecasting methods based on the data available, the project scope and objectives, and other relevant factors.
+ <i>Develop forecasting methods:</i> Once the forecasting methods have been selected, develop and/or refine the selected traffic forecasting method(s) for forecasting as needed based on the complexity of the project.
+ <i>Produce forecasts:</i> Use the developed methods or refined travel demand models to produce traffic forecasts.
+ <i>Evaluate and document results:</i> Evaluate the accuracy of the forecasts and document the results.

The duration of each of these steps will depend on the complexity of the project and the forecasting methods being used. It is important to set realistic timelines and to adjust the schedule as needed to ensure that the project is completed on time and within budget. Here is an estimated duration for each of the steps in the traffic forecasting process:

<div style="text-align:center; color:grey; margin:1rem"><i>Table 3-1 General Guidelines for Developing Traffic Forecasting Schedule</i></div> 

<style>
table {
  /* border-collapse: collapse; */
  /* width: 100%; */
  /* display: table-cell;
  vertical-align: center; 
  text-align: center; */

}


th{
  text-align:center;
  background-color: #7954A1;
  color: white;
  vertical-align: center; 
  text-align: center;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 16px;
}

td {
  text-align: left;
  vertical-align: middle;
  border-color: #96D4D4;
  font-size: 13px;
  vertical-align: center; 
  text-align: center;
  /* background-color:  white; */
  /* padding: 8px; */
  /* width: 25%;  */
}


tr:nth-child(even) {
  background-color:  #EFDCF9;
}


</style>

<table style="margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;margin-bottom:0.2rem">
  <tr>
  <th>Steps</th>
  <th style="padding-left: 3rem; padding-right: 2rem">Estimated Duration</th>

  </tr>

   <tr>
  <td style="text-align:left"><b>Define the scope and objectives of the project</b></td>
  <td><b>1-2 weeks</b></td>

  </tr>
   <tr>
  <td style="text-align:left"><b>Identify data needs and sources</b></td>
  <td><b>1-2 weeks</b></td>
  </tr>

  <tr>
  <td style="text-align:left"><b>Collect and process data</b></td>
  <td><b>4-8 weeks*</b></td> 
  </tr>


  <tr>
  <td style="text-align:left"><b>Select forecasting methods</b></td>
  <td><b>1-2 weeks</b></td> 
  </tr>

  <tr>
  
  <td style="text-align:left"><b>Develop forecasting methods</b></td>
  <td><b>4-8 weeks*</b></td>
  
  </tr>

  <tr>
  <td style="text-align:left"><b>Produce forecasts</b></td>
  <td><b>8-12 weeks*</b></td> 
  </tr>

  <tr>
  
  <td style="text-align:left"><b>Evaluate and document results</b></td>
  <td><b>4-6 weeks</b></td>
  
  </tr>
</table>

<div style="font-size:13px; text-align:center; margin-bottom:0.8rem">* Depending on the complexity of the project, the duration of the task may be shorter or longer.</div>

It is important to note that these are just approximations, and the actual duration of each step will depend on the complexity of the project, the availability of data, and other factors. Additionally, some steps may need to be repeated or revisited if issues arise during the forecasting process. It is important to be flexible and adaptable throughout the process to ensure that the final forecasts are accurate and reliable.

