---
title: TURNS5-V2014
sidebar: mydoc_sidebar
permalink: 7_4.html
folder: mydoc
---

<style>
  div{text-align: justify;}
</style>

<span class="subtitle-3">7.4.1 Background</span>

Generally, the accepted program for determining future year turning movements is TURNS5- V2014. It is used to develop future year turning movements based on one of two methods. The first method allows for the user to enter an existing year AADT and specify simple growth for three other periods (normally project opening, mid-design and design years). The second method allows for the user to input an existing year AADT and model forecast year AADT. The program will then interpolate or extrapolate for two other periods. It provides output of AADTs and DHVs and allows for comparisons and smoothing to ensure that the user is producing reasonable results.

TURNS5-V2014 was developed as a tool for the estimation of future turning volumes. TURNS5- V2014 is an Excel template which was developed by merging two other programs in use by several FDOT districts and creating a user driven menu and “file folder” windows for easier use. TURNFLOW1 and TURNS32 form the basic framework of the TURNS5-V2014 program.

TURNFLOW is an Excel template that provides a spreadsheet structure for estimating intersection turning movements when only approach volumes are known. The spreadsheet uses a technique for solving and balancing turning movement volumes based on an initial estimate of turning proportions entered by the user. The program iteratively balances volumes until a minimum tolerance is reached. This procedure was developed by E. Hauer, E. Pagitsas and B.T. Shin3. TURNFLOW and its documentation can be obtained from the McTrans Center of the University of Florida. It should be noted that the software is copyrighted and the TURNS5 program creators have secured its use for FDOT.

<div style="font-size: 13px">
<sup>1</sup> TURNFLOW (Copyright 1988, Mark C. Schaefer), supported and distributed by the McTrans Center, University of Florida, 512 Weil Hall, Gainesville, FL 32611-2083<br>
<sup>2</sup> TURNS3, developed by FDOT, District 1, 801 Broadway Avenue, Bartow, Florida 33830<br>
<sup>3</sup> Estimation of Turning Flows from Automatic Counts," Transportation Research Board, Record No. 795, 1981

</div>




















