---
title: Methods in the NCHRP Report 765
sidebar: mydoc_sidebar
permalink: 7_6.html
folder: mydoc
---

<style>
  div{text-align: justify;}
</style>

<a href="https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/22366/analytical-travel-forecasting-approaches-for-project-level-planning-and-design" target="_blank">NCHRP Report 765</a> provides alternative ways to develop turning movement forecasts from assigned traffic volumes from a travel demand model. It is important to recognize that most travel demand models do not have sufficient details to produce accurate turning movement volumes directly from the model output. On the one hand, not all roadways connecting to intersections for which turning movement forecasts are desired are coded in the model network. In some cases, some intersections may include an approach that is in fact a centroid connector, either as a replacement for one of the intersections legs or a surrogate for a number of other local roadways; thus, an artificial set of turning movements is introduced at the intersection. When traffic assignment is performed, the turning movements at the node representing the intersection may vary considerably from observed intersection turning movements. On the other hand, turning movement analyses are typically required for an hour, but traffic assignment results are either 24- hour volumes or period volumes depending on the type of models being used. While directional volumes are reported in the model, they are more of a function of trip balancing than of actual directional distribution. The user is advised to exercise caution when using the model output to develop turning movement volumes. Nevertheless, there are three (3) categories of procedures for forecasting turning movements from model output, and these procedures can be applied using either daily or period traffic assignment results, directional or non-directional volumes, and with or without model turning movement assignments:
<ul>
<li style="margin:0.3rem 0">Factoring procedures</li>
<li style="margin:0.3rem 0">Iterative procedures</li>
<li style="margin:0.3rem 0">“T” intersection procedures</li>
</ul>




