---
title: Design Requirements
sidebar: mydoc_sidebar
permalink: 8_5.html
folder: mydoc
---

<style>
  div{text-align: justify;}
</style>

<span class="subtitle-3">8.5.1 ESAL<sub>D</sub> Equation</span> 

The predicted traffic loading to be furnished by the planning group is the cumulative 18-KIP ESAL axle applications expected on the design lane.

The designer must factor the project traffic forecast by direction and by lanes (if more than two lanes). <b>Equation 8-2</b> on is used to determine the traffic in the design lane for the design period:

<center>$$ESAL_{D}=\sum_{i=1}^n AADT_{i}\times{L_F}\times{T_{24}}\times{D_F}\times{E_F}\times{365}$$</center>
<div class="italic-grey">Equation 8-2</div>

Where:

$$ESAL_{D}$$ = The number of accumulated 18-KIP Equivalent Single Axle Loads in the design lane for the design period.The number of accumulated 18-KIP Equivalent Single Axle Loads in the design lane for the design period.

$$i$$ =	The year for which the calculation is made. When i = 1, all the variables apply to year 1. Some of the variables remain constant while others, such as AADT, L<sub>F</sub>, and T<sub>24</sub>, may change from year to year. Other factors may change when changes in the system occur. Such changes include parallel roads, shopping centers, truck terminals, etc.

$$n$$ =	The number of years the design is expected to last. (e.g., 10, 20, ...).

$$AADT_i$$ =	Annual Average Daily Traffic for year i.

$$T$$ =	Percent heavy trucks during a 24-hour period. Trucks with six tires or more are considered in the calculations (Class 4-13).

$$D_F$$ =	Directional Distribution Factor. Use 1.0 if one-way traffic is counted or 0.5 for two-way traffic. This value is not to be confused with the Directional Factor (D) used for planning capacity computations.

$$L_F$$ =	Lane Factor converts directional trucks to the design lane trucks. Lane factors can be adjusted to account for unique features known to the designer such as roadways with designated truck lanes. Lf values can be determined from <b>Table 8-1</b>.

$$E_F$$ =	Equivalency Factor is the damage caused by one average heavy truck measured in 18-KIP ESALs. These factors should be provided by the Planning Department for each project. They will be reviewed annually and updated if needed by FDOT TDA Office based on WIM data. An example of EF (E80) values for different types of facilities is shown in <b>Table 8-2</b>.


<span class="subtitle-3">8.5.2 Directional Distribution Factor (D<sub>F</sub>)</span> 

Since the number of trucks represents the total for all lanes and both directions of travel, this number must be distributed by direction and by lanes for design purposes. Two-way directional distribution is usually made by assigning 0.5 (50 percent) of the traffic to each direction. One- ways are assigned 1.0 (100 percent).

Although D<sub>F</sub> is generally 0.5 (50 percent) for most roadways, there are instances where more weight may be moving in one direction than the other. In such cases, the side with heavier vehicles should be designed for a greater number of ESAL units. For example, D<sub>F</sub> may be assigned as 0.7 to account for trucks heavily loaded in one direction. (In practice, both directions of an undivided road would probably be designed for the heavier traffic.)

<span class="subtitle-3">8.5.3 Lane Factor (L<sub>F</sub>)</span>

The LF is calculated by using the Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Evaluation System (COPES) equation as described in NCHRP No. 277, Transportation Research Board (TRB), September 1986, as shown in <b>Equation 8-3</b>.

<center>$$L_{F}=1.567-0.0826\times{ln(OneWayAADT)}-0.12368\times{LV}$$</center>
<div class="italic-grey">Equation 8-3</div>

Where:

$$L_F$$ = Proportion of all one directional trucks in the design lane.

$$LV$$ = 0 if the number of lanes in one direction is 2.

$$LV$$ = 1 if the number of lanes in one direction is 3 or more.

$$L_n$$ = Natural Logarithm.
