---
title: ELToD Method for Forecasting Express Lanes Project Traffic
sidebar: mydoc_sidebar
permalink: 9_4.html
folder: mydoc

---


<style>
  div{text-align: justify;}

</style>

The use of a regional travel demand model <span style="color: #248ec2"><b>in combination with</b></span> the ELToD Static Assignment Model is the preferred method to prepare project traffic forecasts for Express Lanes. ELToD is a stand-alone application that follows the FSUTMS standards and works in conjunction with all Florida’s travel demand models. ELToD was initially calibrated using 2011 data from I-95 Express Phase 1. Since then, ELToD has been re-calibrated against observed data in Broward and Palm Beach Counties on both I-95 Express Phase 1-4 and I-595 Express. Florida’s Turnpike Enterprise has used ELToD for project traffic forecasting for numerous projects around the state in the South Florida, Central Florida, and West Central Florida regions.


<style>
table {
  border-collapse: collapse;
  /* width: 100%; */
  display: table-cell;
  /* vertical-align: center;  */
  
  /* text-align: center; */
}


th{
  text-align:center;
  background-color: #248ec2;
  color: white;
  vertical-align: middle;
}

td {
  text-align: left;
  vertical-align: middle;
  border-color: #96D4D4;
  font-size: 13px;
  /* padding: 8px; */
  /* width: 25%;  */
}

tr:nth-child(even) {
  background-color:  #EEF2F8;
}
</style>

<div style="text-align:center; color:grey; margin:1rem"><i>Table 9-1 Express Lanes Project Traffic Forecasting Methods Used in Florida</i></div> 


<table>
  <tr>
  <th colspan=2 style="width:21%">Method</th>
  <th style="width:8%">Activity/Project Phase</th>
  <th style="width:19%">Data Requirements</th>
  <th>Pros</th>
  <th style="width:25%">Cons</th>
  </tr>

  
  <tr>
  <td colspan=2>Manual Estimation Using Peak Hour O-D</td>
  <td>Sketch-Level</td>
  <td>- O-D data<br>
      - EL Access Points Estimated EL Share</td>
  <td>- Quick estimation method<br>
      - Provides expected volume range for EL Ramps</td>
  <td>- Supply/demand equilibrium not considered<br>
      - Aggregate effect of multiple O-Ds not considered</td>
  </tr>


  <tr>
  <td rowspan=2 style="width: 4%; vertical-align: middle; background-color:#E34234; color:white; writing-mode:vertical-lr; vertical-align:middle;text-align: center; transform: rotate(-180deg);transform-origin: middle">Travel Demand Model Based</td>
  <td>Regional Travel Demand Model (TDM) with Dynamic Toll Function or VTTS Curve Assignment</td>
  <td>Corridor Panning / PD&amp;E /Design</td>
  <td>- EL Access Points<br>
- Number of EL Lanes<br>
- Speed &amp; Capacity Info<br>
- Dynamic Toll Function/
VTTS Curve</td>
  <td>- Estimates Daily or period
demand directly from
TDM without needing to
use another model<br>
- Provides a systemwide
EL evaluation</td>
  <td>- Typically uses
generalized cost or
predefined share<br>
- Dynamic toll calculation
typically at period level
and not at 15-min or
hourly levels<br>
- Toll amount not reported
or used<br>
- VOR not considered<br>
- Long model run times
for alternative testing<br>
- Post processing needed</td>
  </tr>

  <tr>
  
  <td>Regional
Travel
Demand
Model with
ELToD Static
Assignment
Model</td>
  <td>Corridor
Planning /
PD&amp;E /
Design</td>
  <td>- O-D (from TDM)<br>
- EL Access Points<br>
- Number of EL Lanes<br>
- Speed &amp; Capacity Info<br>
- Toll Choice Parameters
(VTTS, VOR, Toll
Constant)</td>
  <td>- Proven to be efficient<br>
- Quick turnaround time for
alternatives testing<br>
- Consistent results in
controlled environment<br>
- ncorporates value of
reliability<br>
- Calculates tolls,
congested speeds, and
volumes by hour</td>
  <td>- Does not account for
queue spillback<br>
- EL choice selection at
first entry only</td>
  </tr>

  <tr>
  <td colspan=2 bgcolor=white>Micro-simulation
Model</td>
  <td>Design</td>
  <td>- O-D (from TDM or
mesoscopic model)
- Concept Plans (with EL
Access Points and
Number of Lanes)<br>
- Signal Timings
- Pricing Model
Parameters<br>
- Decision Model
Parameters (VTTS, Toll
Constant)</td>
  <td>- Pricing model customized
to match the Statewide
Express Lanes Software
tolling algorithm<br>
- Accounts for complex
weaving and geometry<br>
- Accounts for queue build-
up, spillback and
dissipation<br>
- Can be integrated with
other multi-resolution
tools</td>
  <td>- Extensive time and effort
for model development
and validation<br>
- Default model does not
account for VOR and
requires customized
scripting<br>
- EL choice selection at
first entry only<br>
- Coding difficulties for
unconventional
ingress/egress ramp combinations<br>
- EL module cannot be
run concurrent with the
network-wide
microscopic dynamic
traffic assignment</td>
  </tr>
  
</table>
<br>
ELToD estimates the volume of traffic by hour on both general use and Express Lanes by
applying <b>Equation 9-1</b> to O-D matrices from any travel demand model, including models that
already have Express Lanes functionality in the highway assignment process. ELToD also
identifies the Express Lanes dynamic toll and congested speeds by hour based on traffic
conditions. The ELToD model has a robust choice model component in a controlled
environment that can account for various factors that are involved in Express Lanes choice,
such as reliability, comfort, safety, lane preference and avoidance of trucks. ELToD provides
robust results with quick run times; yet is detailed enough for project traffic forecasting and for
Express Lanes ingress/egress traffic operations testing.

In ELToD, the percentage of traffic using the Express Lanes, or Express Lanes share, is
calculated using the equation below. The equation reflects the latest representation of the toll
choice model.

$$Express\:Lanes\:Share = \frac{1}{1+e^{(-1*(\beta_{constant}+\beta_{Time}*Time+\beta_{Toll}*Toll+\beta_{Reliability}*Reliability-Distance Penalty))}}$$

<div style="text-align:center; color:grey"><i>Equation 9-1</i></div> 

<style>
  p{padding-left:15px}
</style>

Where:

$$\beta_{constant}$$ - This parameter determines the Express Lanes share when time, toll, and reliability have a net zero effect. 

$$\beta_{Time}$$ - This parameter is for the travel time coefficient in the choice model equation
defined in the ELToD Model as the Travel Time Coefficient (with units of 1/min). This is
the disutility of increasing travel time by one minute.

$$\beta_{Toll}$$ - This parameter is for the toll cost coefficient in the choice model equation defined in the ELToD Model as the Toll Coefficient (with units of 1/$). This is the disutility of
increasing the toll by one dollar.

$$\beta_{Reliability}$$ - This parameter is calculated from a Reliability Ratio (defined in the ELToD
Model as the Reliability Coefficient Ratio) and the travel time coefficient. It indicates the
disutility of one unit (one minute) of standard deviation.

Distance Penalty – This parameter is a penalty applied to trips that may use the Express
Lanes for a short distance to discourage short Express Lanes trips.

The ELToD Model procedure uses four primary sets of inputs:
<ul>
<li style="margin:0">Total estimated subarea project traffic (in a matrix layout) at a period or daily level.</li>
<li style="margin:0">Hourly distribution of total traffic within the project corridor (by direction), based on
observed traffic data.</li>
<li style="margin:0">Geometric configuration of the subarea network links: link lengths, free flow speed, lane
capacity, and link facility type.</li>
<li style="margin:0">Toll costs: Pricing policy curve, including toll rate limits (minimum and maximum toll
rates).</li>
</ul>


The steps to use ELToD for project traffic forecasting are as follows:

<ol>
<li style="margin:0"> Obtain inputs (1, 2, and 3 above) from the validated regional travel demand model.</li>

<li style="margin:0">Obtain input (4 above) from the current FDOT toll pricing policy.</li>

<li style="margin:0">Create a subarea model with Express Lanes and apply ELToD.</li>

<li style="margin:0">Update the ELToD model parameters, consistent with guidance in the ELToD – User
Guide and Documentation.</li>

<li style="margin:0">Run the ELToD model.</li>
</ol>

The following model output data is extracted from the link data, and summarized by hour and
direction:

<ul>
<li style="margin:0">Volume</li>
<li style="margin:0">Time of Day Percent</li>
<li style="margin:0">Express Lanes Share</li>
<li style="margin:0">V/C Ratio</li>
<li style="margin:0">Congested Speed</li>
<li style="margin:0">Tolls</li>
<li style="margin:0">Revenue</li>
</ul>


For more detailed information about the ELToD Static Assignment Model, please refer to the
<i>ELToD – User Guide and Documentation</i>. This report can be requested through the Florida’s
Turnpike Enterprise, Toll Studies &amp; Express Lanes Development Department.

It should be recognized that there have been some research efforts to evaluate the use of
mesoscopic dynamic traffic assignment (DTA) models, such as Cube Avenue and DTALite, for
Express Lanes forecasting. However, these methods would require significant programming
and calibration efforts to include the ELToD toll choice model methodology. An ELToD DTA
version has been developed by the Florida’s Turnpike Toll Studies &amp; Express Lanes
Development Department and can be made available upon request.